---
title: Grace Has No Prerequisites
authorId: Tyndale
createdAt: 2016-08-01T20:07:00-07:00
category: Grace
---

I realized this week that, at my core, I have never understood grace. In
my mind, there has always been a minimum level of obedience I must meet
before I’m eligible to receive Christ’s grace.

In more instances than I dare recount, I have decided that I’m not
allowed to ask for God’s help unless I have already done everything in
my power to be perfect.  At my core, I believe that I have to set
spiritual goals, and sacrifice to achieve them, and succeed at living
them exactly for a couple of weeks -- because otherwise God will just
ignore me.  Unless and until I meet every one of the standard Mormon
checkboxes, God will deem me unworthy.  Unless I remove the mote from my
eye, I have no grounds to ask God to intercede on my behalf.  I have to
"study it out in my mind" before I dare ask.  I have to prove to God I’m
serious!  I often find myself delaying days or weeks to even dare pray
about the desires of my heart.  And the more significant the question
is, the longer I stall.

Sometimes, in moments of quiet meditation amidst my falling short of
perfect, God will creep in with love and reassurance.  (*"Listen, you’re
my child, and I want to talk to you.  Come as you are.  I’m just happy
you’re here."*)  But instead of gratitude I often respond with
suspicion.  I can’t trust that comfort – I’ve been taught my whole life
that sin drives away the Holy Ghost; that the spirit doesn’t dwell in
unholy places.  Since I’m imperfect, that sense of peace or comfort must
be the devil tricking me instead.  I resolve to try harder, to do
everything in my power to be perfect, before I’ll seek re-confirmation
that God’s answer was real.

But this week, my perspective shifted. While reading an essay of William
Tyndale’s on prayer, I encountered a provocative passage. In it, Tyndale
explains that it is a sin to "mistrust God" by “professing an obedience
of your own making.”

The phrase struck me.  By avoiding God, I mistrust God.  By brushing
aside feelings of love, I mistrust God.  By forcing myself to color
within the lines of my own checkboxes of worthiness, I mistrust God.
Mistrusting God is a sin.  *My very attempt to assure myself that I’m
avoiding sin is a sin.*

A few pages later, Tyndale elaborated further.

>"Thou shalt never have rest in thy soul, neither shall the worm of
conscience ever cease to gnaw thine heart, till thou come at Christ;
till thou hear the glad tidings, how that God for his sake hath forgiven
thee all freely.  If thou trust in thy works, there is no rest. Thou
shalt think, I have not done enough...
>
>...As pertaining to good deeds therefore, do the best thou canst, and
desire God to give strength to do better daily; but in Christ put thy
trust[.]"
>
>— William Tyndale, *Obedience of a Christian Man*, Oct. 2, 1528.

Apparently my struggle of the last decade is actually (at least) 500
years old.  I re-read and re-read and finally prayed for an hour about
that passage.  What better description could there be of what I have
spent the last decade doing?  In my soul I never rested, because I could
never do enough, because I trusted in my own obedience and checkboxes
more than I trusted God.

I thought I could *earn *forgiveness and grace.  But that’s just wrong
-- the radical truth of Christianity is that Christ "*for **his** sake
has forgiven me all freely."* There is no minimum standard of obedience
to access grace.  My sins do not mean I’m unworthy to pray; my sins are
the very frailty through which God inspires me to turn to Him. No matter
where I am or what I’ve done or how far I’ve fallen short, I am always
invited to rest in Christ.  I am always one prayer away from a
spiritual hug.
