---
title: Learning, emotions, and mental maps
authorId: Locke
category: learning
createdAt: 2016-08-22T11:14:24.349Z
---

*I gave this talk earlier in August at my local LDS congregation.*

Recently I was visiting family and ended up on babysitting duty for
several hours for some of my nieces and nephews.

An hour or two in they decided they wanted to watch a movie. Which I, as
the babysitter, was quite fine with. They picked the Pixar movie "Inside
Out" which I hadn’t seen. And I ended up really enjoying the movie. It’s
quite novel. It covers a few traumatic weeks in the life of a 11-year
old girl who’s moving across the country from Minnesota to here, to San
Francisco. The novel part is that they turn her emotions into
characters. Joy, Sadness, Anger, Disgust, and Fear. The movie is
constantly zooming into her “head” to show them working in their
“command center”. Her emotions are constantly monitoring the situations
the girl is getting into and debate over possible responses and take
turns directing her actions.

I really liked this "council of the mind" metaphor. Where, when deciding
something, we simulate our different emotions and “personalities” as
real people suggesting and debating possible options.

Something I thought particularly interesting about the movie (I won’t
spoil the ending if you haven’t seen it) is how Joy, the ringleader of
the emotions, learns to appreciate Sadness. At the start of the movie
she thinks Sadness is useless at best and at worst, destructive. But as
the drama unfolds, she learns that Sadness does have an important role
to play.

I feel like I’ve reacted in similar ways to some emotions in the past.
I’d feel I was a bad person if I felt sad, despair, anger, fear,
powerless, and so on and tried to avoid situations where I’d feel those
"bad" emotions.

But what I’ve learned is that there are no "bad" or “good” emotions.
Emotions are simply signals from our subconscious to the conscious part
of our brain. Emotions shouldn’t control us, they are meant to guide us.

If you touch a hot stove and get burnt, it doesn’t mean you should now
avoid the stove forever more! It just means you should use oven mitts
next time! The stove is really useful!

Emotions can teach us really useful things!

Some scriptures.

>"if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" — [D&C 38:30](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/dc-testament/dc/38.30?lang=eng)

If we flip that around it says that if you’re preparing for something
and you’re *feeling a lot of fear* then perhaps you just need to
redouble your preparation!

Another scripture.

> "I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out
all fear." — [Mormon 8:16](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bofm/morm/8.16?lang=eng)

If you feel you need to do something or perhaps talk to someone and are
fearing people's responses — perhaps in the council of your mind you
should stop and listen closely to what Love has to say. Perhaps once
given a voice, Love would "cast out" Fear.

One day your Shame and Guilt might be telling you that you’ve done
something wrong that you need to make amends for. But it could also just
be someone trying to manipulate you!

Emotions aren’t perfect guides. Council with your emotions but don’t
blindly follow them.

Let’s talk about maps! Maps are super useful. We use them to help us
navigate unfamiliar territory. Maps come in all sorts. Some maps are
detailed. Others are high-level and vague.

But maps aren’t reality. They’re a representation of reality that show
the most important information that we need to solve a problem
(generally driving or walking around).

In a similar way, our brains hold maps to reality which we use to
navigate through life. We don’t experience reality directly but as
mediated by our "mental maps". We’re constantly building new maps and
tweaking old maps (or even sometimes forgetting maps we don’t need
anymore). Like maps of the physical world, our *mental* maps can be
vague or detailed. Imagine taking a chemistry class. When we start, our
understanding of chemistry might be quite poor. Something like a map of
the world zoomed way out so we can only see the continents perhaps. But
as we learn, our mental map of chemistry gets more and more detailed
until soon we can see coastlines, lakes, rivers, mountains, and so on.

One big difference between our mental maps and maps of the physical
world is our mental maps are often wrong! Imagine if Google Maps had
roads that didn’t exist, or that said a road was a freeway but actually
had a big brick wall in the middle that we’d slam into. Imagine if
Google Maps gave us bad directions 1/4 of the time. It’d be horrible!
We’d just want to stay home and do nothing. That’s what happens too if
our mental maps of the world are poor.

Great maps help us navigate our lives confidently. Poor mental maps lead
us astray and cause problems and missed opportunities.

## How our mental maps get out of sync with reality

>"It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s what you
know for sure that just ain’t so." — Mark Twain

We want to see the world as we feel it should be. We put things on our
mental maps that "just ain’t so".

Why do we do this? There’s lots of reasons. Perhaps it’s something we
fear and try to avoid thinking about. Perhaps we want something so badly
we can’t see a world where we don’t get it. Perhaps there are things we
were taught when young that turn out to be wrong (evil traditions of
their fathers…), etc.

A lot of why we refuse to see the world as it really is comes from
pride. Pride, President Benson warned us is *the* great stumbling block.

Joseph Smith said we’re "saved *no faster* than we get knowledge". Which
means *anything* that keeps us from learning, from gaining knowledge,
keeps us in our current pickle. Pride is what keeps us lost, keeps us
stumbling. Humility (the antidote to pride) is what lets us learn, is
what saves us.

We can all think of things that were hard when younger that now are
easy. What changed? We gained knowledge! We understand what we once
didn’t understand. Our mental maps got better! We can navigate where
before we were lost. All of us have immense capacity to learn. None of
us are permanently stuck.

So if you’re struggling with something, think to yourself "what is it
that I need to learn to be saved from my current problem and what aspect
of pride is blocking me from learning that?"

* Maybe you need a long walk to sort through your thoughts and feelings
and perhaps you’re not used to asking for personal time and pride is
preventing you from asking your partner to cover you while gone.

* Perhaps there’s someone you need to ask for help and pride is
preventing you from showing vulnerabilities in front of them.

* Or perhaps you just need to admit some unpleasant realities about
yourself and pride is preventing you from admitting that you’re
inadequate and make mistakes.

What is the reward for these difficult learning exercises?? Good maps!
Mental maps of our world that helps you navigate confidently through
your life.

Pride is the great stumbling block. It’s what stops us from learning
what we need so we can be saved from our predicaments. Humility helps us
see the world clearly and accurately and receive and give help to
others.

Emotions are an incredibly useful guides. There are no bad emotions.
They are what they are. Don’t be ruled by them but take guidance from
them.

And finally, we need guidance from the Holy Ghost. It doesn’t come as
often as I’m sure anyone wants but I testify it does come when we’re
worthy and asking and the Lord chooses to bless us with it. Expect it,
record it and treasure and ponder it.

>For the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, *it speaketh
of things as they really are*, and of things as they really will be;
wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the
salvation of our souls. — Jacob 4:13

I testify the Spirit speaks the truth to us about our realities and this
is necessary for the salvation of our souls.
