---
title: Returning Again, for the First Time
createdAt: 2016-08-01T11:07:00-07:00
category: Scripture Readings
authorId: [Laura]
---

_"We shall not cease from exploration, and the end of all our exploring
will be to arrive where we started and know the place for the first
time." — T. S. Eliot_

I was first introduced to this quote a few months ago, in a talk from
the April 2016 session of LDS General Conference by Elder Gerrit Gong.

I was spiritually bored, and the details of discipleship were starting
to disappear into the backdrop of daily life. My faith felt sealed to
skepticism and my discipleship felt baptized in restraint. But Elder
Gong’s gentle, accessible talk asked me to remember, revisit, and renew
my relationship to Christ with all its attending devotions. And I was
captivated. By the idea that I could return to the water of my spiritual
roots and find it turned into wine. By the thought that in the Bible and
Book of Mormon stories that my teacher had told to me, even after
reading them dozens of times, I could come to know Christ and my own
discipleship again -- for the first time.

The next morning, I opened a fresh copy of the Book of Mormon to 1
Nephi, chapter 1.

---
Whether you’re visiting a place for the first time, or revisiting a
place to know it for the first time, visiting places is hard. Just ask
our poor, beleaguered friends from 1 Nephi. Patriarch Lehi gets a
vision, and the whole clan moves to the wilderness. They’re in a new
place, definitely suffering. Nobody seems very happy about it -- not
even Valiant Nephi[^1]. But then Nephi has a spiritual vision that sets the
stage for the rest of the Book of Mormon: he is reintroduced to God, for
the first time.

*"The virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God” (11:18).* [^2]

*“The Lamb of God went forth and was baptized”* (11:27).

*"He went forth ministering unto the people”* (11:28).

*“They were healed by the power of the Lamb of God”* (11:31).

*“The Son of the everlasting God was slain for the sins of the world”* (11:32-33).

Nephi apparently already believes in the Son of God, but doesn’t know
much about him, as all of this seems to be new information.[^3] In
recounting this vision, he mentions the mortality of the Son of God
non-stop; he typically refrains from calling him “God” or “Lord,” as he
has called Deity until now.

Coming to know God again for the first time, for Nephi, seems to have
meant distinguishing the Son of God as an individual, complete with a
role and personality distinct from His Father. Staggeringly, to Nephi,
the Son of God has a mortal role. Actionable, mortal words like
“Redeemer of the world” (11:27), “apostles” (11:34), “cleanse” (12:10),
and “gospel / doctrine” (13:24-26; 15:14) show up frequently in
reference to the Son of God.

And if the Son of God newly needs characterization and differentiation
from His Father, apparently the Father needs it from His Son, too. Nephi
revisits his ephemeral, newly unfamiliar God with words like “eternal”
(12:18), “power” (13:16,18), “love” (11:22), and “wrath” (13:11).

Once distinguished, which face of Deity stays with us in our journey
through The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ? The whole
plot seems to be one long process through which Jesus Christ reveals
himself to the Nephites. The twists and turns of that arc launch here,
between 1 Nephi 11-15, when the Son of God -- not His Father -- is
introduced as the center of Nephite cosmology, and Nephi comes to know
God, again, for the first time.

[^1]: 1 Nephi 17:6
[^2]: This is the Mormon standard for scriptural citations. So I’m
sticking to it.
[^3]: 1 Nephi 11:6, 17
