---
title: A Time to Seek, and a Time To Lose
authorId: The Utopian
createdAt: 2016-08-01T20:08:00-07:00
category: Faith
---

*"Give me only your love and your grace. With this I am rich enough, and
I have no more to ask."*

—St. Ignatius of Loyola


Ecclesiastes was read in church today – which is never on the greatest
hits list: "vanity of vanities" and all that. It’s sort of a dour start
to the week. But in many ways, this is what’s striking to me about the
book. Because one of the purposes of faith is that it’s supposed to
answer for us the hard question of purpose and death: What makes my life
matter if I know I’m not going to be here to see it all through. And
faith does answer this to some degree: we have Christ, we have eternity,
and we know that we’ll be with our loved ones forever, at least if God
in His mercy and grace allows. But that doesn’t explain my emotional
reaction to the message. And I think that’s for one of two reasons, or
perhaps some of both: (1) there’s either some doubt that I have that my
faith is true, or (2) that for all that I may believe that my hope lies
in eternity, there are a whole slew of things in life that still matter
to me that I, perhaps for good reason, would morn to lose.

Doubt, I think is never going to be entirely absent from our life on
earth: True faith is impossible in the presence of certainty. (Though,
perhaps the writer of Hebrews disagrees). And maybe this is a good
thing: Seeking the Divine even in the face of difficulty, including the
difficulty of knowing truth, makes that faith more meaningful and pure.
For this reason, our Lord blesses us today as "those who have not seen
and yet have come to believe." But it also means the problem of meaning
is never far from us. Maybe this also is a good thing? The need for
meaning is one of the sparks that draws us to faith, when we feel far
away from God it forces us to re-examine our life to align more closely
with the Gospel, and in that reflection it also draws us to look towards
others – even if the feeling is uncomfortable.

Which of course, is the second reason I find Ecclesiastes to be
challenging (other than my version not translating "Qoheleth" into
“Teacher”): Much of my life, particularly as a young attorney, is
devoted to hard work – defined by it even. Perhaps to drive the point
home, today’s Gospel was the story in Luke 12 of the rich man whose
bountiful harvest was left after his life was demanded of him in the
night. Hard work, of course, is inevitable and desirable: much good can
come from trying to accomplish something for my client and my community
that will be meaningful – perhaps even lasting. Unlike St. Ignatius,
many of us can’t spend much of our lives living in a cave, but where
“your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” And there’s no doubt,
that as a young professional, while I may also wish to help others, I
also very much want to have earthly treasure, comfort, and rest: These
are good things and are much preferable to suffering. But after too much
of them, and after perhaps too little service, Qoheleth ends up back on
the reading list.
